---
UID: 20240709100348 
aliases: 
tags: 
source: 
cssclass: 
created: 2024-07-09
---
## ✍内容
> [!def] definition of category
> [[Riehl-CTC.pdf#page=21&rect=117,290,507,553|Riehl-CTC, p.3]]

> [!def] definition of groupoid
> A groupoid is a category in which every morphism is an isomorphism.

> [!def] definition
> Slice category: [[Riehl-CTC.pdf#page=26&rect=121,127,492,370|Riehl-CTC, p.8]]

> [!def] definition
> A group G (or, more generally, a monoid 9) defines a category BG with a single object. [[Riehl-CTC.pdf#search=A group G (or, more generally, a monoid9) defines a category BG with a single object.|Riehl-CTC, p.5]]

> [!def] monomrophism and epimorphism
> [[Riehl-CTC.pdf#page=29&rect=122,282,493,412|Riehl-CTC, p.11]]
> 

> [!caution] Counterexample
> Both monic and epic morphism is not isomorphism.  [[Riehl-CTC.pdf#page=30&rect=120,475,494,527|Riehl-CTC, p.12]]

> [!def]
> $\displaystyle \text{Cat}$ is a category whose objects are small category and whose morphisms are functors between them.
> This category is locally small but not small.
> It contains $\displaystyle \text{Set,Poset,Monoid,Group,Groupiod}$ as proper subcategories. However none of these categories are objects of $\displaystyle \text{Cat}$. [[Riehl-CTC.pdf#page=38&rect=121,371,499,516|Riehl-CTC, p.20]]

> [!def]
> 逗号范畴 (comma category):
> [[Riehl-CTC.pdf#page=40&rect=119,290,512,456|Riehl-CTC, p.22]]

> [!def]
> A category is connected if any pair of objects can be connected by a finite zig-zag of morphisms.

> [!def] full, faithful, essentially surjective
> [[Riehl-CTC.pdf#page=48&rect=122,129,438,176|Riehl-CTC, p.30]]
> [[Riehl-CTC.pdf#page=49&rect=127,648,491,679|Riehl-CTC, p.31]]

> [!def]
> Skeleton [[Riehl-CTC.pdf#page=52|Riehl-CTC, p.34]]

> [!NOTE]
> The advantage of the commutative diagrams approach to this definition is that it readily generalizes to other category.

- $ Sierpinski space [[Riehl-CTC.pdf#page=72&rect=126,543,495,677|Riehl-CTC, p.54]]



