---
UID: 20240831153124 
aliases: 
tags: 
source: 
cssclass: 
created: 2024-08-31
---
## Basic theory of field
> [!NOTE]
> The notation of characteristic makes sense also for any integral domain and its characteristic will be the same as for its field of fractions.

- ~ Both $\displaystyle \mathbb{F}_{p}[x]$ and its field of fractions $\displaystyle \mathbb{F}_{p}(x)$ has characteristic $p$.

> [!def]
> The <font color="#2DC26B">prime subfield</font> of $\displaystyle F$ is the subfield of $F$ generated by the multipulicative identity $\displaystyle 1_{F}$ of $F$. It is (isomorphic to) either $\displaystyle \mathbb{Q}$ (if $\displaystyle \mathrm{char}(F)=0$) or $\displaystyle \mathbb{F}_{p}$ (if $\displaystyle \mathrm{char}(F)=p$). 

- ~ the prime subfield of both $\displaystyle \mathbb{Q}$ and $\displaystyle \mathbb{R}$ is $\displaystyle \mathbb{Q}$.
- ~ the prime subfield of $\displaystyle \mathbb{F}_{p}(x)$ is isomorphic to $\displaystyle \mathbb{F}_{p}$.

> [!NOTE]
> If $K$ is an extension over $F$, then the multipulication defined on $K$ makes $K$ into a <u>vector space</u> over $F$. In particular, every field $F$ can be considered as a vector space over its prime field.

> [!def]
> The<font color="#2DC26B"> degree (or relative degree or index) </font>of $\displaystyle K/F$, denoted $\displaystyle [K:F]$, is the dimension of $K$ as a vector space over $F$ (i.e. $\displaystyle [K:F]=\dim_{F}(K)$).

> [!proposition]
> $\varphi:F\to F'$ is a homomorphism of fields. Then $\displaystyle \varphi$ is either identically 0 or is injective, so that the image of $\displaystyle \varphi$ is either 0 or isomorphic to $F$.

> [!thm]
> Theorem 3. Let $F$ be a field and let $p(x) \in F[x]$ be an irreducible polynomial. Then there exists a field $K$ containing an isomorphic copy of $F$ in which $p(x)$ has a root. Identifying $F$ with this isomorphic copy shows that there exists an extension of $F$ in which $p(x)$ <u>has a root</u>.

Pf: Let $\displaystyle K\coloneqq F[x]/(p(x))$, where $\displaystyle (p(x))$ is maximal ideal in $\displaystyle F[x]$, so $\displaystyle K$ is a field. The *canonical* projection $\displaystyle \pi:F[x]\to F[x]/(p(x))$ restricted to $\displaystyle F\subset F[x]$ gives a *homomorphism* $\displaystyle \varphi=\left.\pi\right|_{F}:F\to K$ which is not identically 0 since $\displaystyle \varphi(1_{F})=1_{K}$. So $\displaystyle \varphi (F)\cong F$ is an isomorphic copy of $F$ contained in $K$. 
We identify $F$ with its isomorphic in $K$ and view $F$ as a subfield of $K$. If $\displaystyle \overline{x}\coloneqq\pi(x)$ denotes the image of $x$ in the quotient $K$, then 
$$
\begin{aligned}
p(\overline{x}) & =\overline{p(x)} & (\text{since }\pi\text{ is a homomorphism}) \\
 & =p(x)\ (\text{ mod }p(x)) &\text{in }F[x]/(p(x)) \\
 & =0 &  \text{in }F[x]/(p(x))
\end{aligned}
$$
So $K$ contain a root of $\displaystyle p(x)$. Then $K$ is an extension of $\displaystyle F$ in which the polynomial $\displaystyle p(x)$ has a root.
> [!NOTE]
> We can use the above result to prove that all roots of $\displaystyle p(x)$ are contained in some extension of $F$.

> [!thm]
> Theorem 4. Let $p(x) \in F[x]$ be an irreducible polynomial of degree $n$ over the field $F$ and let $K$ be the field $F[x] /(p(x))$. Let $\theta=x \bmod (p(x)) \in K$. Then the elements$$1, \theta, \theta^2, \ldots, \theta^{n-1}$$are a basis for $K$ as a vector space over $F$, so the degree of the extension is $n$, i.e., $[K: F]=n$. Hence$$K=\left\{a_0+a_1 \theta+a_2 \theta^2+\cdots+a_{n-1} \theta^{n-1} \mid a_0, a_1, \ldots, a_{n-1} \in F\right\}$$
consists of all polynomials of degree $<n$ in $\theta$.

The proof is trivial. [[Abstract Algebra Third Edition (David S. Dummit, Richard M. Foote) (Z-Library).pdf#page=527|Abstract Algebra Third Edition (David S. Dummit, Richard M. Foote) (Z-Library), p.527]]
> [!def]
> Let $K$ be an extension of the field $F$ and let $\alpha, \beta, \cdots \in K$ be a collection of elements of $K$. Then the smallest subfield of $K$ containing both $F$ and the elements $\alpha, \beta, \ldots$, denoted $F(\alpha, \beta, \ldots)$ is called the <font color="#2DC26B">field generated</font> by $\alpha, \beta, \ldots$ over $F$

> [!def]
> If the field $K$ is generated by a single element $\alpha$ over $F, K=F(\alpha)$, then $K$ is said to be a <font color="#2DC26B">simple extension</font> of $F$ and the element $\alpha$ is called a primitive element for the extension.

> [!thm]
> Theorem 6. Let $F$ be a field and let $p(x) \in F[x]$ be an irreducible polynomial. Suppose $K$ is an extension field of $F$ containing a root $\alpha$ of $p(x): p(\alpha)=0$. Let $F(\alpha)$ denote the subfield of $K$ generated over $F$ by $\alpha$. Then$$F(\alpha) \cong F[x] /(p(x))$$

Pf: The natural homomorphism $\displaystyle \phi: F[x]\to F[\alpha], a (x)\mapsto a(x)$ has $\displaystyle p(x)$ in its kernel, then it induces a homomorphism $\displaystyle F[x]/(p(x))\to F[\alpha]$ also denoted by $\displaystyle \phi$. Since $\displaystyle p(x)$ is irreducible, $\displaystyle F[x]/(p(x))$ happens to be a field, then we have field isomorphism $\displaystyle \phi (F[x]/(p (x)))\cong F[x]/(p(x))$ (since $\displaystyle \phi$ is not identically 0). Since the image $\displaystyle \phi(F[x]/(p(x)))$ contains $F$ and $\displaystyle \alpha$, by the definition of $\displaystyle F(\alpha)$, $\displaystyle \phi (F[x]/(p (x)))\cong F(\alpha)$.
## Algebraic extension
> [!proposition]
> Proposition 11. Let $\alpha$ be algebraic over the field $F$ and let $F(\alpha)$ be the field generated by $\alpha$ over $F$. Then $$F(\alpha) \cong F[x] /\left(m_\alpha(x)\right)$$ so that in particular $$[F(\alpha): F]=\operatorname{deg} m_\alpha(x)=\operatorname{deg} \alpha$$i.e., the degree of $\alpha$ over $F$ is the degree of the extension it generates over $F$.

Pf: the proof is immediately from thm 6.
> [!proposition]
> Proposition 12. The element $\alpha$ is algebraic over $F$ if and only if the simple extension $F(\alpha) / F$ is finite. More precisely, if $\alpha$ is an element of an extension of degree $n$ over $F$ then $\alpha$ satisfies a polynomial of degree at most $n$ over $F$, and if $\alpha$ satisfies a polynomial of degree $n$ over $F$ then the degree of $F(\alpha)$ over $F$ is at most $n$.

The proof is routine.
> [!IMPORTANT]
> Any extension $K$ of $F$ (with characteristic $\neq2$) of degree 2 is of the form $\displaystyle F(\sqrt{ D })$ where $D$ is an element of $F$ which is not a square in $F$, and conversely, every extension is an extension of degree 2 of $F$.

Let $\displaystyle \alpha\in K-F$, then there is a minimal polynomial $\displaystyle m_{\alpha}(x)=x^{2}+bx+c,\text{where }b, c\in F$. $\displaystyle \alpha$ is a solution of $\displaystyle m_{\alpha}$, thus $\displaystyle \alpha=\frac{-b\pm \sqrt{ b^{2}-4c }}{2}$. It can be proved that $\displaystyle K=F(\alpha)=F(\sqrt{ b^{2}-4c }).$
> [!thm]
> Theorem 14. Let $F \subseteq K \subseteq L$ be fields. Then$$[L: F]=[L: K][K: F]$$

The proof is routine.
- ~  The element $\sqrt{2}$ is not contained in the field $\mathbb{Q}(\alpha)$ where $\alpha$ is the real root of $x^3-3 x-1$ between 0 and 2 , since we have already determined that $[\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2}): \mathbb{Q}]=2$ and $[\mathbb{Q}(\alpha): \mathbb{Q}]=3$ and 2 does not divide 3 . Note that <u>it is not so easy</u> to prove directly that $\sqrt{2}$ cannot be written as a rational linear combination of $1, \alpha, \alpha^2$.

> [!def]
> Definition. An extension $K / F$ is finitely generated if there are elements $\alpha_1, \alpha_2, \ldots, \alpha_k$ in $K$ such that $K=F\left(\alpha_1, \alpha_2, \ldots, \alpha_k\right)$.

> [!lem]
> Lemma 16. $F(\alpha, \beta)=(F(\alpha))(\beta)$, i.e., the field generated over $F$ by $\alpha$ and $\beta$ is the field generated by $\beta$ over the field $F(\alpha)$ generated by $\alpha$.

Pf: this follows by the minimality of field extension in question. Just check $\displaystyle \subseteq$ and $\displaystyle \supseteq$.
> [!NOTE]
> The following is an example for determinating the index of field extension.

- ~ Consider the field $\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2}, \sqrt{3})$ generated over $\mathbb{Q}$ by $\sqrt{2}$ and $\sqrt{3}$. Since $\sqrt{3}$ is of degree 2 over $\mathbb{Q}$ the degree of the extension $\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2}, \sqrt{3}) / \mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2})$ is at most 2 and is precisely 2 if and only if $x^2-3$ is irreducible over $\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2})$. Since this polynomial is of degree 2 , it is reducible only if it has a root, i.e., if and only if $\sqrt{3} \in \mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2})$. Suppose $\sqrt{3}=a+b \sqrt{2}$ with $a, b \in \mathbb{Q}$. Squaring this we obtain $3=\left(a^2+2 b^2\right)+2 a b \sqrt{2}$. If $a b \neq 0$, then we can solve this equation for $\sqrt{2}$ in terms of $a$ and $b$ which implies that $\sqrt{2}$ is rational, which it is not. If $b=0$, then we would have that $\sqrt{3}=a$ is rational, a contradiction. Finally, if $a=0$, we have $\sqrt{3}=b \sqrt{2}$ and multiplying both sides by $\sqrt{2}$ we see that $\sqrt{6}$ would be rational, again a contradiction. This shows $\sqrt{3} \notin \mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2})$, proving$$[\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2}, \sqrt{3}): \mathbb{Q}]=4
$$ Elements in this field (by "closing" $1, \sqrt{2}, \sqrt{3}$ ) include $1, \sqrt{2}, \sqrt{3}, \sqrt{6}$ and by the computations above, these form a basis for this field: $$\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2}, \sqrt{3})=\{a+b \sqrt{2}+c \sqrt{3}+d \sqrt{6} \mid a, b, c, d \in \mathbb{Q}\}$$

> [!thm]
> Theorem 17. The extension $K / F$ is finite if and only if $K$ is generated by a finite number of algebraic elements over $F$. More precisely, a field generated over $F$ by a finite number of algebraic elements of degrees $n_1, n_2, \ldots, n_k$ is algebraic of degree $\leq n_1 n_2 \cdots n_k$.

> [!cor]
> Corollary 18. Suppose $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are algebraic over $F$. Then $\alpha \pm \beta, \alpha \beta, \alpha / \beta$ (for $\beta \neq 0$ ), (in particular $\alpha^{-1}$ for $\alpha \neq 0$ ) are all algebraic.

Pf: $\alpha \pm \beta, \alpha \beta, \alpha / \beta$ (for $\beta \neq 0$ ), (in particular $\alpha^{-1}$ for $\alpha \neq 0$ ) lie in $\displaystyle F(\alpha,\beta)$ which is finite.
- ~ Consider the extension $\mathbb{C} / \mathbb{Q}$ and let $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}$ denote the subfield of all elements in $\mathbb{C}$ that are algebraic over $\mathbb{Q}$. In particular, the elements $\sqrt[n]{2}$ (the positive $n^{\text {th }}$ roots of 2 in $\mathbb{R}$ ) are all elements of $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}$, so that $[\overline{\mathbb{Q}}: \mathbb{Q}] \geq n$ for all integers $n>1$. Hence $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}$ is an infinite algebraic extension of $\mathbb{Q}$, called the field of algebraic numbers.
- ~ Consider the field $\overline{\mathbb{Q}} \cap \mathbb{R}$, the subfield of $\mathbb{R}$ consisting of elements algebraic over $\mathbb{Q}$. The field $\mathbb{Q}$ is countable. The number of polynomials in $\mathbb{Q}[x]$ of any given degree $\boldsymbol{n}$ is therefore also countable (since such a polynomial is determined by specifying $n+1$ coefficients from $\mathbb{Q}$ ). Since these polynomials have at most $n$ roots in $\mathbb{R}$, the number of algebraic elements of $\mathbb{R}$ of degree $n$ is countable. Finally, the collection of all algebraic elements in $\mathbb{R}$ is the countable union (indexed by $n$ ) of countable sets, hence is countable. Since $\mathbb{R}$ is uncountable, it follows that <u>there exist (in fact many) elements of</u> $\mathbb{R}$ <u>which are not algebraic, i.e., are transcendental, over</u> $\mathbb{Q}$. In particular the subfield $\overline{\mathbb{Q}} \cap \mathbb{R}$ of algebraic elements of $\mathbb{R}$ is a proper subfield of $\mathbb{R}$, so also $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}$ is a proper subfield of $\mathbb{C}$.

It is <u>extremely difficult</u> in generalto prove that a given real number is not algebraic. For example, it is known (these are theorems) that $\pi=3.14159 \ldots$ and $e=2.71828 \ldots$ are transcendental elements of $\mathbb{R}$. <u>Even the proofs that these elements are not rational are not too easy.</u>
> [!thm]
> Theorem 20. If $K$ is algebraic over $F$ and $L$ is algebraic over $K$, then $L$ is algebraic over $F$.

Pf: Since $L$ is algebraic over $K$, we have $\displaystyle \alpha$ in $L$, s.t.
$$
a_{n}\alpha^{n}+a_{n-1}\alpha^{n-1}+\dots+a_{0}=0,a_{i}\in K
$$
Consider $\displaystyle F(\alpha,a_{0},a_{1},\dots,a_{n})$, since $K$ is algebraic over $F$, $n$ is finite, then $\displaystyle F(a_{0},a_{1},\dots,a_{n})$ is algebraic over $F$. And the degree of extension $\displaystyle F(\alpha,a_{0},a_{1},\dots,a_{n})/F(a_{0},a_{1},\dots ,a_{n})$ is at most $n$, due to the above equation. Then $\displaystyle \left[F\left(\alpha, a_0, a_1, \ldots, a_n\right): F\right]=\left[F\left(\alpha, a_0, \ldots, a_n\right): F\left(a_0, \ldots, a_n\right)\right]\left[F\left(a_0, \ldots, a_n\right): F\right]$ is also finite.
> [!def]
> Definition. Let $K_1$ and $K_2$ be two subfields of a field $K$. Then the composite field of $K_1$ and $K_2$, denoted $K_1 K_2$, is the smallest subfield of $K$ containing both $K_1$ and $K_2$. Similarly, the composite of any collection of subfields of $K$ is the smallest subfield containing all the subfields.

- ~ The composite of the two fields $\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt{2})$ and $\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt[3]{2})$ is the field $\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt[6]{2})$. This is because this field contains both of these subfields $\left((\sqrt[6]{2})^3=\sqrt{2}\right.$ and $\left.(\sqrt[6]{2})^2=\sqrt[3]{2}\right)$ and conversely, any field containing both $\sqrt{2}$ and $\sqrt[3]{2}$ contains their quotient, which is $\sqrt[6]{2}$.
> [!proposition]
> Proposition 21. Let $K_1$ and $K_2$ be two finite extensions of a field $F$ contained in $K$. Then $$\left[K_1 K_2: F\right] \leq\left[K_1: F\right]\left[K_2: F\right]$$
with equality if and only if an $F$ -basis for one of the fields remains linearly independent over the other field. If $\alpha_1, \alpha_2, \ldots, \alpha_n$ and $\beta_1, \beta_2, \ldots, \beta_m$ are bases for $K_1$ and $K_2$ over $F$, respectively, then the elements $\alpha_i \beta_j$ for $i=1,2, \ldots, n$ and $j=1,2, \ldots, m$ span $K_1 K_2$ over $F$.

> [!cor]
> Corollary 22. Suppose that $\left[K_1: F\right]=n,\left[K_2: F\right]=m$ in Proposition 21, where $n$ and $m$ are relatively prime: $(n, m)=1$. Then $\left[K_1 K_2: F\right]=\left[K_1: F\right]\left[K_2: F\right]=n m$.

